README.md, before:


- [Data engineering ETL project](#data-engineering-etl-project)
    - [Run locally](#run-locally)
  - [Architecture and services in this template](#architecture-and-services-in-this-template)
  - [Writing pipelines](#writing-pipelines)
  - [(Optional) Advanced cloud setup](#optional-advanced-cloud-setup)
    - [Prerequisites:](#prerequisites)
    - [Tear down infra](#tear-down-infra)
    - [More steps:](#more-steps)


# Data engineering ETL project
### Run locally

To run locally, you need:

1. [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)
2. [Github account](https://github.com/)
3. [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) with at least 4GB of RAM and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) v1.27.0 or later

Clone the repo and run the following commands to start the data pipeline:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap.git
cd etl-coincap
make up
sleep 30 # wait for Airflow to start
make ci # run checks and tests
```
Go to [http:localhost:8080](http:localhost:8080) to see the Airflow UI. Username and password are both `airflow`.

## Architecture and services in this template

This data engineering project template, includes the following:

1. **`Airflow`**: To schedule and orchestrate DAGs.
2. **`Postgres`**: To store Airflow's details (which you can see via Airflow UI) and also has a schema to represent upstream databases.
3. **`DuckDB`**: To act as our warehouse
4. **`Quarto with Plotly`**: To convert code in `markdown` format to html files that can be embedded in your app or servered as is.
5. **`cuallee`**: To run data quality checks on the data we extracted from CoinCap API.
6. **`minio`**: To provide an S3 compatible open source storage system.

For simplicity services 1-5 of the above are installed and run in one container defined [here](./containers/airflow/Dockerfile).

![DET](./assets/images/det2.png)

The `coincap_elt` DAG in the [Airflow UI](http://localhost:8080) will look like the below image:

![DAG](./assets/images/dag.png)

You can see the rendered html at [./visualizations/dashboard.html](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/visualization/dashboard.html).

The file structure of our repo is as shown below:

![File strucutre](./assets/images/fs.png)

## Writing pipelines

We have a sample pipeline at [coincap_elt.py](./dags/coincap_elt.py) that you can use as a starter to create your own DAGs. The tests are available at [./tests](./tests) folder.

Once the `coincap_elt` DAG runs, we can see the dashboard html at [./visualization/dashboard.html](./visualization/dashboard.html) and will look like ![Dashboard](./assets/images/dash.png).

## (Optional) Advanced cloud setup

If you want to run your code on an EC2 instance, with terraform, follow the steps below.

### Prerequisites:

1. [Terraform](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/terraform/install-cli) 
2. [AWS account](https://aws.amazon.com/) 
3. [AWS CLI installed](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv2.html) and [configured](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-configure.html)

You can create your GitHub repository based on this template by clicking on the `Use this template button in the **[etl-coincap](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap)** repository. Clone your repository and replace content in the following files

1. **[cd.yml](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/.github/workflows/cd.yml)**: In this file change the `etl-coincap` part of the `TARGET` parameter to your repository name.
2. **[variable.tf](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/terraform/variable.tf)**: In this file change the default values for `alert_email_id` and `repo_url` variables with your email and [github repository url](https://www.theserverside.com/blog/Coffee-Talk-Java-News-Stories-and-Opinions/GitHub-URL-find-use-example) respectively.

Run the following commands in your project directory.

```shell
# Create AWS services with Terraform
make tf-init # Only needed on your first terraform run (or if you add new providers)
make infra-up # type in yes after verifying the changes TF will make

# Wait until the EC2 instance is initialized, you can check this via your AWS UI
# See "Status Check" on the EC2 console, it should be "2/2 checks passed" before proceeding
# Wait another 5 mins, Airflow takes a while to start up
# Link: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:

make cloud-airflow # this command will forward Airflow port from EC2 to your machine and opens it in the browser
# the user name and password are both airflow

make cloud-metabase # this command will forward Metabase port from EC2 to your machine and opens it in the browser
# use https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/env file to connect to the warehouse from metabase
```

For the [continuous delivery](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/.github/workflows/cd.yml) to work, set up the infrastructure with terraform, & defined the following repository secrets. You can set up the repository secrets by going to `Settings > Secrets > Actions > New repository secret`.

1. **`SERVER_SSH_KEY`**: We can get this by running `terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw private_key` in the project directory and paste the entire content in a new Action secret called SERVER_SSH_KEY.
2. **`REMOTE_HOST`**: Get this by running `terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw ec2_public_dns` in the project directory.
3. **`REMOTE_USER`**: The value for this is **ubuntu**.

### Tear down infra

After you are done, make sure to destroy your cloud infrastructure.

```shell
make down # Stop docker containers on your computer
make infra-down # type in yes after verifying the changes TF will make
```

### More steps:
- Install `aws-cli`:
  ```bash
  brew install awscli
  aws configure
  ```
- How to Get AWS Credentials (Access Key & Secret Key):
  ```
  Log in to the AWS Console:

  Go to https://aws.amazon.com/
  Sign in with your AWS account.
  Navigate to IAM (Identity and Access Management):

  Search for IAM in the AWS Management Console.
  Click Users on the left panel.
  Create or Select a User:

  If you already have a user:
  Click the username.
  Go to the Security credentials tab.
  If you don't have a user:
  Click Add User.
  Provide a username and enable Programmatic access (for CLI and API use).
  Attach the AdministratorAccess policy for testing purposes (or limit permissions based on your use case).
  Create an Access Key:

  Click Create access key.
  Download the .csv file or copy the Access Key ID and Secret Access Key.
  ```
  - Add `AdministratorAccess` permission to User:
    ```
    Log into **AWS Console permissions** (like: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/iam/home?region=us-east-1#/users/details/aws_01?section=permissions)
    Go to IAM > Users.
    Select the user aws_01.
    Click Add permissions -> Attach policies directly.
    Search for and attach the policy: AdministratorAccess.
    Click Add permissions.
    ```
- Check the Airflow progress in EC2 instance:
  ```bash
  terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw private_key > private_key.pem
  chmod 600 private_key.pem
  ssh -i private_key.pem ubuntu@<Public-IPv4-Address-AWS> # in: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:sort=desc:dnsName
    docker ps # See 3 services, that's done!
  ```
- Update GitHub repository secrets programmatically:
  ```bash
  gh auth login
  gh secret set REMOTE_HOST --body "$(terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw ec2_public_dns)"
  gh secret set SERVER_SSH_KEY --body "$(terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw private_key)"
  gh secret set REMOTE_USER --body "ubuntu"
  gh secret list
  ```
- **Start the instance** on AWS before doing CD from Github Action.

Commit message:

feat: local ok, add ssh-ec2-host, edit readme, [wip] in deploy server

README.md, after:


- [Data engineering ETL project](#data-engineering-etl-project)
    - [Run locally](#run-locally)
  - [Architecture and services in this template](#architecture-and-services-in-this-template)
  - [Writing pipelines](#writing-pipelines)
  - [(Optional) Advanced cloud setup](#optional-advanced-cloud-setup)
    - [Prerequisites:](#prerequisites)
    - [Tear down infra](#tear-down-infra)
    - [More steps:](#more-steps)


# Data engineering ETL project
### Run locally

To run locally, you need:

1. [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)
2. [Github account](https://github.com/)
3. [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) with at least 4GB of RAM and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) v1.27.0 or later

Clone the repo and run the following commands to start the data pipeline:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap.git
cd etl-coincap
make up
sleep 30 # wait for Airflow to start
make ci # run checks and tests
```
Go to [http:localhost:8080](http:localhost:8080) to see the Airflow UI. Username and password are both `airflow`.

## Architecture and services in this template

This data engineering project template, includes the following:

1. **`Airflow`**: To schedule and orchestrate DAGs.
2. **`Postgres`**: To store Airflow's details (which you can see via Airflow UI) and also has a schema to represent upstream databases.
3. **`DuckDB`**: To act as our warehouse
4. **`Quarto with Plotly`**: To convert code in `markdown` format to html files that can be embedded in your app or servered as is.
5. **`cuallee`**: To run data quality checks on the data we extracted from CoinCap API.
6. **`minio`**: To provide an S3 compatible open source storage system.

For simplicity services 1-5 of the above are installed and run in one container defined [here](./containers/airflow/Dockerfile).

![DET](./assets/images/det2.png)

The `coincap_elt` DAG in the [Airflow UI](http://localhost:8080) will look like the below image:

![DAG](./assets/images/dag.png)

You can see the rendered html at [./visualizations/dashboard.html](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/visualization/dashboard.html).

The file structure of our repo is as shown below:

![File strucutre](./assets/images/fs.png)

## Writing pipelines

We have a sample pipeline at [coincap_elt.py](./dags/coincap_elt.py) that you can use as a starter to create your own DAGs. The tests are available at [./tests](./tests) folder.

Once the `coincap_elt` DAG runs, we can see the dashboard html at [./visualization/dashboard.html](./visualization/dashboard.html) and will look like ![Dashboard](./assets/images/dash.png)

## (Optional) Advanced cloud setup

If you want to run your code on an EC2 instance, with **Terraform**, follow the steps below.

### Prerequisites:

1. [Terraform](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/terraform/install-cli) 
2. [AWS account](https://aws.amazon.com/) 
3. [AWS CLI installed](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv2.html) and [configured](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-configure.html)

Clone your repository and replace content in the following files

1. **[cd.yml](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/.github/workflows/cd.yml)**: In this file change the `etl-coincap` part of the `TARGET` parameter to your repository name.
2. **[variable.tf](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/terraform/variable.tf)**: In this file change the default values for `alert_email_id`, `repo_url` and `repo_name` variables with your email, [github repository url](https://www.theserverside.com/blog/Coffee-Talk-Java-News-Stories-and-Opinions/GitHub-URL-find-use-example) and repository name respectively.

Run the following commands in your project directory.

```shell
# Create AWS services with Terraform
make tf-init # Only needed on your first terraform run (or if you add new providers, or remove `.terraform/`)
make infra-up # type in yes after verifying the changes TF will make

# Wait until the EC2 instance is initialized, you can check this via your AWS UI
# See "Status Check" on the EC2 console, it should be "2/2 checks passed" before proceeding
# Wait another 5 mins, Airflow takes a while to start up
# Link: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:

make cloud-airflow # this command will forward Airflow port from EC2 to your machine and opens it in the browser
# the user name and password are both airflow
```

For the [continuous delivery](https://github.com/bdbao/etl-coincap/blob/main/.github/workflows/cd.yml) to work, set up the infrastructure with terraform, & defined the following repository secrets. You can set up the repository secrets by going to `Settings > Secrets > Actions > New repository secret`.

1. **`SERVER_SSH_KEY`**: We can get this by running `terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw private_key` in the project directory and paste the entire content in a new Action secret called SERVER_SSH_KEY.
2. **`REMOTE_HOST`**: Get this by running `terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw ec2_public_dns` in the project directory.
3. **`REMOTE_USER`**: The value for this is **ubuntu**.

### Tear down infra

After you are done, make sure to destroy your cloud infrastructure.

```shell
make down # Stop docker containers on your computer
make infra-down # type in yes after verifying the changes TF will make
```

### More steps:
- Install `aws-cli` and configure:
  ```bash
  brew install awscli
  aws configure
  ```
- How to Get AWS Credentials (Access Key & Secret Key):
  ```
  Log in to the AWS Console:

  Go to https://aws.amazon.com
  Sign in with your AWS account.
  Navigate to IAM (Identity and Access Management):
    Search for IAM in the AWS Management Console.
    Click Users on the left panel.
  
  Create or Select a User:
    If you already have a user:
      Click the username.
      Go to the Security credentials tab.
    If you don't have a user:
      Click Add User.
      Provide a username and enable Programmatic access (for CLI and API use).
      Attach the AdministratorAccess policy for testing purposes (or limit permissions based on your use case).
  
  Create an Access Key:
    Click Create access key. (choose: CLI usage)
    Download the .csv file or copy the Access Key ID and Secret Access Key.
  ```
  - Add `AdministratorAccess` permission to User:
    ```
    Log into AWS Console permissions (like: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/iam/home?region=us-east-1#/users/details/aws_01?section=permissions)
    Go to IAM > Users.
    Select the user aws_01.
    Click Add permissions -> Attach policies directly.
    Search for and attach the policy: AdministratorAccess.
    Click Add permissions.
    ```
- Check the Airflow progress in EC2 instance:
  ```bash
  make ssh-ec2
  # If restarting EC2, the IPv4-Address changed
  make ssh-ec2-host <new-IPv4-Address> # in: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:sort=desc:dnsName
    docker ps # See 3 services, that's done!

  terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw private_key > private_key.pem
  chmod 600 private_key.pem
  ssh -i private_key.pem ubuntu@<Public-IPv4-Address-AWS> # in: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:sort=desc:dnsName
    docker ps # See 3 services, that's done!
  ```
- Update GitHub repository secrets programmatically:
  ```bash
  gh auth login
  gh secret set REMOTE_HOST --body "$(terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw ec2_public_dns)"
  gh secret set SERVER_SSH_KEY --body "$(terraform -chdir=./terraform output -raw private_key)"
  gh secret set REMOTE_USER --body "ubuntu"
  gh secret list
  ```
- **Start the instance** on AWS before doing CD from Github Action.
